 
 
 
 
 Setun - Wikipedia 


 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jump to content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Main menu 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 Main menu 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 

 
 
 
 Navigation
 
 
 
 
 
 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Contribute
 
 
 
 
 
 Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 Appearance 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Donate 
 
 Create account 
 
 Log in 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 Personal tools 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

 Donate 
 
 

 Create account 
 
 

 Log in 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 


 
 
 
 (Top) 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 History 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toggle History subsection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.1 
 Initiation of the project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.2 
 Setun computer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 
 Setun-70 computer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.4 
 End of the Setun project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 Adoption and application 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 Critics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 Compared to binary computers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 See also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 

 
 Setun 
 
 
 
 

 14 languages 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 العربية Български Deutsch Suomi Français Galego 日本語 ქართული 한국어 Polski Русский Українська 文言 中文 
 
 Edit links 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 Talk 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 English 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read 
 
 Edit 
 
 View history 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 Tools 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 Tools 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 

 
 
 
 Actions
 
 
 
 
 

 Read 
 
 

 Edit 
 
 

 View history 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 General
 
 
 
 
 
 What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Switch to legacy parser 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Print/export
 
 
 
 
 
 Download as PDF Printable version 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 In other projects
 
 
 
 
 
 Wikidata item 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appearance 
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 


 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 Soviet ternary computer 
 For the river in Russia, see Setun (river) . 
 "},"input":{"wt":""},"camera":{"wt":""},"power":{"wt":""},"cpu":{"wt":""},"cpu_speed":{"wt":""},"storage":{"wt":""},"memory":{"wt":""},"memory_type":{"wt":""},"display":{"wt":""},"audio":{"wt":""},"online_services":{"wt":"&lt;!-- online service/s offered -->"},"dimensions":{"wt":""},"weight":{"wt":""},"touchpad":{"wt":""},"predecessor":{"wt":""},"successor":{"wt":"[[Setun-70]]"},"related":{"wt":""}},"i":0}}]}'> Setun A photo of a Setun computer in 1959. Developer Sergei Sobolev and Nikolay Brusentsov at Moscow State University Manufacturer Kazan Mathematical plant Released 1959 ; 67   years ago   ( 1959 ) Lifespan 1959–1965 Units   sold 50 Successor Setun-70 
 Setun ( Russian : Сетунь ) was a computer developed in 1958 at Moscow State University . It was built under the leadership of Sergei Sobolev and Nikolay Brusentsov . It was the first modern ternary computer , using the balanced ternary numeral system and three-valued ternary logic instead of the two-valued binary logic prevalent in other computers. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] 

 Overview [ edit ] 
 The computer was built to fulfill the needs of Moscow State University. It was manufactured at the Kazan Mathematical plant. Fifty computers were built from 1959 until 1965, when production was halted. The characteristic operating memory consisted of 81 words of memory, each word composed of 18 trits (ternary digits) with additional 1944 words on magnetic drum (total of about 7   KB). [ 4 ] Between 1965 and 1970, a regular binary computer was used at Moscow State University to replace it. Although this replacement binary computer performed equally well, it was 2.5 times the cost of the Setun. [ 5 ] 

 In 1970, a new ternary computer architecture, the Setun-70 , was developed. Edsger W. Dijkstra 's ideas of structured programming were implemented in the hardware of this computer. The short instructions set was developed and implemented by Nikolay Brusentsov independently from RISC architecture principles. [ 5 ] 

 The Setun-70 hardware architecture was transformed into the Dialogue System of Structured Programming (DSSP). DSSP emulates the "Setun 70" architecture on binary computers, thus it fulfills the advantages of structured programming. DSSP programming language has similar syntax to the Forth programming language but has a different sequence of base instructions, especially conditional jump instructions. DSSP was developed by Nikolay Brusentsov and doctoral students in the 1980s at Moscow State University . A 32-bit version was implemented in 1989. 

 History [ edit ] 

 Initiation of the project [ edit ] 
 The Setun project was initiated by Sergei Sobolev , in order to develop a small computer for use at the Moscow State University , after the planned transfer of the M-2 computer to the university got canceled in 1953. In 1956, he organized a series of seminars analyzing the disadvantages of existing computers and various plans for technical implementation. These meetings included participants from the Moscow State University, the Institute of Atomic Energy, and other institutes of the Academy of Sciences. Notable attendees include Shura-Bura, Konstantin Adolfovich Semendaev, and Zhogolev. On one of these seminars on April 23, 1956, Nikolay Petrovich Brusentsov was appointed as the executive designer and supervisor of the project. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] 

 At the time, Brusentsov was a graduate (equivalent to a master degree, see Education in Russia , traditional model) at Moscow State University, who was graduated from the Moscow Energy Institute . Before appointing Brusentsov as the executive designer of Setun computer, Sobolev transferred Brusentsov to the Mechanics-Mathematics department and sent him to Gutenmakher's laboratory at the Institute for Precision Mechanics to gain relevant experience. To Brusentsov, this was an invaluable experience. In the lab, he had access to the lab's computers and their supporting documentation, which Brusentsov found being "technically weak". Brusentsov then decided to use a ternary number system. 

 Setun computer [ edit ] 
 Sobolev continued to support the project both by finding assistants and participating in the discussions. In 1956, Brusentsov started the design with four engineers and five technicians plus himself. The whole team worked in a 60-square-meter room with laboratory tables, where they designed and assembled the machine by hand. Zhogolev worked as the main programmer, and together with him, Brusentsov developed the computer architecture of Setun. In 1958, the team grew to 20 people, and the first model of the Setun computer was assembled. The name Setun comes from a river near the University. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] 

 After the first model of Setun was built, the Kazan Mathematical Machines Factory was decreed by the Soviet Cabinet of Ministers to mass-produce the Setun computers. However, the leadership at the Kazan plant was not interested in large-scale computer production. The second model built in the factory was sent back because the plant managers and officials maintained that the computer was not yet reliable. The team was forced to manually adjust the second model. On November 30, 1961, the director of the Kazan factory was forced to sign an act which ended the attempts to cease the production of the Setun computer. The computers were then produced at the rate of 15-20 machines annually until 1965, when the plant refused to continue the production as the sale price of the computer was too low. 

 While Setun attracted significant interest from abroad, the Ministry of Foreign Trade never filled the orders received. Only 50 Setun computers have been manufactured, 30 of which were used in the higher education institutions inside the Soviet Union. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] 

 Setun-70 computer [ edit ] 
 Between 1961 and 1968, Brusentsov and Zhogolev developed Setun-70, the next generation of Setun computer with a new architecture. It was designed for effective software development, in which the ternary system played a key role. Both addresses and operations are in syllables, where each syllable's length equals to 6 trits (about 9.5 bits). Algebraic expressions of operands by syllables replace the instructions as words in the traditional design, as the instruction set is updated to allow more variance of operand length. [ 5 ] The algebra is supplemented by testing, control, and input-output operations. The user can add operations on their own without reducing the computer's performance, thus providing the ideal conditions for structured programming. Brusentsov claimed that the programming time on Setun-70 is reduced by five to tenfold with unprecedented reliability, clarity, compactness and speed. 

 The functioning algorithm of Setun-70 was comprehensively described in expanded Algol-60 . 

 End of the Setun project [ edit ] 
 The new university rector considered Brusentsov's research and computer design a pseudo-science . After the Setun-70 project, Brusentsov's lab was relocated from the computer center at Moscow State University to an attic in a student dormitory, and the original prototype of the Setun computer was destroyed. The Setun-70 model was taken to the new attic laboratory and was used as a basis for developing the educational computer system Master Work Station. 

 Adoption and application [ edit ] 
 Thanks to the simplicity and naturalness of its architecture, as well as a well-designed programming system that included the following interpreters—IP-2 (floating-point, 8 decimal digits), IP-3 (floating-point, 6 decimal digits), IP-4 (complex numbers, 8 decimal digits), IP-5 (floating-point, 12 decimal digits)—plus the POLIZ autocode with its operating system and standard subroutine library (floating-point, 6 decimal digits), the Setun computers were quickly mastered by users in universities, industrial plants, and research institutes. They proved to be an effective tool for solving practically important problems across a wide range of fields, from scientific modeling and engineering calculations to weather forecasting and enterprise management optimization. [ 8 ] 

 At user seminars on the Setun computers—held at Moscow State University (1965), the Lyudinovo Diesel-Locomotive Plant (1968), and Irkutsk Polytechnic Institute (1969)—dozens of reports were presented on successful real-world applications for the national economy. Owing to its balanced ternary code, Setun turned out to be a truly universal, easily programmable, and highly efficient computing instrument. It earned a strong reputation, notably as an educational tool for teaching computational mathematics in more than thirty universities. At the Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy, Setun even became the platform for the first automated computer-based learning system. [ 9 ] 

 Critics [ edit ] 
 Brian Hayes argues in his article Third Base that Brusentsov did not realize the theoretical advantage of the base 3 system: [ 10 ] Unfortunately, Setun did not realize the potential of base 3 to reduce component counts. Each trit was stored in a pair of magnetic cores, wired in tandem so that they had three stable states. A pair of cores could have held two binary bits, which amounts to more information than a single trit, and so the ternary advantage was squandered. 

 Compared to binary computers [ edit ] 
 Further information: Ternary computer §   Comparison to binary computing 
 Despite the ternary design never becoming massively produced, there have been discussions on the advantages of the ternary system over the binary system, and great interest was present on the ternary and more generally on the multi-valued logic systems in the academy. [ 11 ] Brusentsov found the ternary number system superior to the binary number system: it allowed him to create very simple and reliable elements, and he needed only one seventh as many elements as Gutenmakher's computers. The power source requirements were also significantly reduced because fewer magnetic rods and diodes were used. He also found the natural number-coding system used in the ternary system superior over the direct, reciprocal and supplementary number coding used in the binary system. He maintained that the ternary system is superior to binary in most aspects and published several papers advocating the ternary system from 1985 to 2014. [ 12 ] 

 See also [ edit ] 

 History of computing in the Soviet Union 

 References [ edit ] 
 
 ↑ Weatherby, Leif. "Hegel 2.0 | Leif Weatherby" . cabinetmagazine.org . 
 ↑ "Глава 2. Киберразнообразие" . DataArt IT Museum . 
 ↑ "The Setun Computer" . December 29, 2014. 
 ↑ "ЭВМ Сетунь " [ Setun computer ] . Russian Virtual Computer Museum (in Russian) . Retrieved September 20, 2016 . 
 1 2 3 4 5 Brousentsov, N. P.; Maslov, S. P.; Ramil Alvarez, J.; Zhogolev, E. A. "Development of ternary computers at Moscow State University" . Russian Virtual Computer Museum . Retrieved January 19, 2015 . 
 1 2 3 "Pioneers of Soviet Computing | SIGCIS" . www.sigcis.org . Retrieved 2025-05-26 . 
 ↑ Prokhorov, Sergei (June 2020). "Sergei Sobolev - the eminent mathematician, founder of Russian computer science". 2020 International Conference Engineering Technologies and Computer Science (EnT) . IEEE. pp.   104– 108. doi : 10.1109/EnT48576.2020.00026 . ISBN   978-1-7281-8090-8 . 
 ↑ Брусенцов, Н.П. (1972). "Электромагнитные цифровые устройства с однопроводной передачей трехзначных сигналов". Наука : 242– 244. 
 ↑ "Троичные ЭВМ "Сетунь" и "Сетунь 70" " . www.computer-museum.ru . Retrieved 2025-05-27 . 
 ↑ Hayes, Brian (2001). "Computing Science: Third Base" . American Scientist . 89 (6): 490– 494. doi : 10.1511/2001.40.490 . ISSN   0003-0996 . JSTOR   27857554 . 
 ↑ Dubrova, Elena. Multiple-Valued Logic in VLSI: Challenges and Opportunities . S2CID   17070721 . Retrieved 2025-05-27 . 
 ↑ Malinovsky, Boris Nikolaevich (2010). Fitzpatrick, Anne; Maldonado, Kate (eds.). Pioneers of Soviet Computing . Translated by Aronie, Emmanuel (2nd   ed.). Special Interest Group for Computing, Information, and Society. 
 

 v t e List of Russian microprocessors Manufacturer Instruction set   MCST Elbrus , x86 
 Elbrus 
 Elbrus-S 
 Elbrus-2S+ 
 Elbrus-2SM 
 Elbrus-4S 
 Elbrus-8S 
 Elbrus-8SV 
 Elbrus-16S 
 SPARC 
 MCST-R150 
 MCST-R500 
 MCST-R500S 
 MCST-R1000 
 MCST-R2000 
 ELVEES MIPS 
 Multicore 
 NVCom-01 
 NIISI MIPS 
 KOMDIV-32 
 KOMDIV-64 
 NTC Module DSP 
 NeuroMatrix 
 Multiclet Multicellular 
 MultiClet P1 
 MultiClet R1 
 Baikal Electronics MIPS32 
 Baikal T1 
 ARM 
 Baikal-M1000 Baikal-S1000 
 
 v t e List of Soviet computer systems 
 A 
 Agat 
 Aragats 
 Argon 
 ATM Turbo 
 BESM 
 Besta 
 Dnepr 
 Dubna 48K 
 Elbrus 
 UKNC 
 DVK 
 Elektronika BK 
 Elektronika 60 
 Elektronika 85 
 Elektronika SS BIS 
 Elektronika MS 1502 
 Elektronika MS 1504 
 ES EVM 
 ES PEVM 
 GVS-100 
 Hobbit 
 Hrazdan 
 Iskra 
 Irisha 
 Juku 
 Kiev 
 KVM-1 
 Korvet 
 M-1 
 M 
 MESM 
 Micro-80 
 Microsha 
 Minsk 
 MIR 
 MIR-2 
 MIR-3 
 Nairi 
 Orion-128 
 Pentagon 
 Poisk 
 Pravetz 
 Promina 
 PS-2000 , PS-3000 
 Radon 
 Radio-86RK 
 Scorpion ZS-256 
 Setun 
 SM EVM 
 Sneg 
 Specialist 
 Strela 
 SVS 
 CUM-1 
 UM 
 Ural 
 UT-88 
 Vector-06C 
 Vesna 
 See also: History of computing in the Soviet Union 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Setun&oldid=1363953390 " 
 Categories : Early computers Soviet computer systems Soviet inventions Computer-related introductions in 1959 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This page was last edited on 13 July 2026, at 14:47 &#160;(UTC) . 
 Page was rendered with Parsoid . 
 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 

 
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Legal & safety contacts 
 Code of Conduct 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 Mobile view 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Toggle the table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Setun 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 14 languages 
 
 

 Add topic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 